Document SQL Support for the Iceberg connector (#13558)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/iceberg.rst

``iceberg.catalog.type`` property, it can be set to either ``HIVE_METASTORE``
or ``GLUE``.

.. _iceberg-hive-catalog:

> Hive metastore catalog

Reviewer: Change to 

Hive metastore service (HMS) 

or just 

Hive metastore

Author: This is about the Iceberg catalog implementation which is backed by HMS. In this case I tend to think that the name is suitable. NO

Reviewer: Sure .. but in the context of Trino its confusing to use catalog for two different concepts .. not sure how to get around this better

and :ref:`read operation <sql-read-operations>` statements, the connector
supports the following features:

> * :doc:`/sql/create-schema`, see also :ref:`iceberg-create-schema`

Reviewer: We do NOT want to link to individual commands.. instead whenever possible it should link to the collection of command similar to read operations in the paragraph above.

See https://trino.io/docs/current/language/sql-support.html

And for example - https://trino.io/docs/current/language/sql-support.html#materialized-view-management

Each of these sections has anchors ..

We only link to individual SQL commands if not all commands in a section are supported (and that should actually not be the case and is considered a bug/feature request)

* :doc:`/sql/create-table`, see also :ref:`iceberg-create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table-as`, see also :ref:`iceberg-create-table`
* :ref:`iceberg-null-column-constraint`
* :doc:`/sql/create-view`
* :doc:`/sql/create-materialized-view`, see also :ref:`iceberg-materialized-views`
* :doc:`/sql/describe`
* :doc:`/sql/insert`
* :doc:`/sql/delete`, see also :ref:`iceberg-delete`
* :doc:`/sql/update`
* :doc:`/sql/merge`
* :doc:`/sql/comment`, see also :ref:`iceberg-comment`
* :doc:`/sql/refresh-materialized-view`, see also :ref:`iceberg-materialized-views`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-table`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-table`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-view`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-materialized-view`, see also :ref:`iceberg-materialized-views`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/show-tables`
* :doc:`/sql/show-columns`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/show-stats`
* :ref:`sql-schema-table-management`, see also :ref:`iceberg-tables`

> * :ref:`sql-materialized-view-management`, see also :ref:`iceberg-materialized-views`

Reviewer: This is correct ..

and :ref:`read operation <sql-read-operations>` statements, the connector
supports the following features:

* :ref:`sql-write-operations`:

>   * :ref:`sql-schema-table-management`, see also :ref:`iceberg-schema-table-management` and :ref:`iceberg-tables`

Reviewer 2: Generated page has repeated "Schema and table management". By the way, why do we want both `sql-schema-table-management` & `iceberg-schema-table-management`? 

<img width="701" alt="Screen Shot 2022-10-06 at 14 35 42" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6237050/194222601-74b1b28a-e635-44fe-999e-8eb964de2d61.png">

Author: We don't need both. Actually having the links on the same line is misleading.
The `iceberg-schema-table-management` has anyway a link towards `sql-schema-table-management` so taking out the `sql-schema-table-management` link from this listing probably ok.

``location`` schema property. The tables in this schema which have no explicit
``location`` set in :doc:`/sql/create-table` statement, are located in a
subdirectory under the directory corresponding to the schema location.

Create a schema on S3::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_s3_schema
  WITH (location = 's3://my-bucket/a/path/');

Create a schema on a S3 compatible object storage such as MinIO::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_s3a_schema
  WITH (location = 's3a://my-bucket/a/path/');

Create a schema on HDFS::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_hdfs_schema
  WITH (location='hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/a/path/');

Optionally, on HDFS, the location can be omitted::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_hdfs_schema;

.. _iceberg-create-table:

Creating tables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Iceberg connector supports creating tables using the :doc:`CREATE
TABLE </sql/create-table>` syntax. Optionally specify the
:ref:`table properties <iceberg-table-properties>` supported by this connector::

    CREATE TABLE my_table (
        c1 integer,
        c2 date,
        c3 double
    )
    WITH (
        format = 'PARQUET',
        partitioning = ARRAY['c1', 'c2'],

>         location = 's3://my-bucket/a/path/'

Reviewer 2: A trailing slash caused a regression in the past versions. Let's avoid using it in the example.

Author: ```
trino> CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.tiny WITH (location='s3a://tiny');
Query 20221007_094114_00002_ct5a7 failed: java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Can not create a Path from an empty string
io.trino.spi.TrinoException: java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Can not create a Path from an empty string
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.ThriftHiveMetastore.createDatabase(ThriftHiveMetastore.java:963)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.BridgingHiveMetastore.createDatabase(BridgingHiveMetastore.java:160)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.cache.CachingHiveMetastore.createDatabase(CachingHiveMetastore.java:450)
	at io.trino.plugin.iceberg.catalog.hms.TrinoHiveCatalog.createNamespace(TrinoHiveCatalog.java:184)
	at io.trino.plugin.iceberg.IcebergMetadata.createSchema(IcebergMetadata.java:609)
	at io.trino.plugin.base.classloader.ClassLoaderSafeConnectorMetadata.createSchema(ClassLoaderSafeConnectorMetadata.java:350)
	at io.trino.metadata.MetadataManager.createSchema(MetadataManager.java:592)
...
```

I've tried on Trino & Hive & MinIO this functionality without a trailing `/` and stumbled on the previously exposed issue.

Author: ```
trino> create table iceberg.tiny.test1 (x integer) with (location='s3a://tiny/test1');
CREATE TABLE
trino> create table iceberg.tiny.test2 (x integer) with (location='s3a://tiny/test2/');
CREATE TABLE
```

On the table however, I see that creating a table is possible with and without trailing slash.
Probably the above mentioned situation is a bug.

and :ref:`read operation <sql-read-operations>` statements, the connector
supports the following features:

* :ref:`sql-write-operations`:

  * :ref:`sql-schema-table-management`, see also :ref:`iceberg-schema-table-management` and :ref:`iceberg-tables`
  * :ref:`sql-data-management`, see also :ref:`iceberg-data-management`
  * :ref:`sql-view-management`
  * :ref:`sql-materialized-view-management`, , see also :ref:`iceberg-materialized-views`

> * :ref:`sql-read-operations`

Reviewer: read operations is already referenced in the paragraph above . remove

.. _iceberg-schema-table-management:

Schema and table management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :ref:`sql-schema-table-management` functionality includes support for:

* :doc:`/sql/create-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table-as`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-table`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-table`
* :doc:`/sql/comment`

.. _iceberg-create-schema:

CREATE SCHEMA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The connector supports creating schemas. You can create a schema with or without
a specified location.

You can create a schema with the :doc:`/sql/create-schema` statement and the

> ``location`` schema property. The tables in this schema which have no explicit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``location`` schema property. The tables in this schema, which have no explicit
```

> ``location`` set in :doc:`/sql/create-table` statement are located in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``location`` set in :doc:`/sql/create-table` statement, are located in a
```

subdirectory under the directory corresponding to the schema location.

Create a schema on S3::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_s3_schema
  WITH (location = 's3://my-bucket/a/path/');

> Create a schema on a S3 compatible object storage (e.g.: MinIO)::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a schema on a S3-compatible object storage, such as MinIO::
```

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_s3a_schema
  WITH (location = 's3a://my-bucket/a/path/');

Create a schema on HDFS::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_hdfs_schema
  WITH (location='hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/a/path/');

Optionally, on HDFS, the location can be omitted::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_hdfs_schema;

.. _iceberg-create-table:

Creating tables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Iceberg connector supports creating tables using the :doc:`CREATE

> TABLE </sql/create-table>` syntax and to optionally specify the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TABLE </sql/create-table>` syntax, Optionally specify the
```

:ref:`table properties <iceberg-table-properties>` supported by this connector::

    CREATE TABLE my_table (
        c1 integer,
        c2 date,
        c3 double
    )
    WITH (
        format = 'PARQUET',
        partitioning = ARRAY['c1', 'c2'],
        location = 's3://my-bucket/a/path/'
    );

When the ``location`` table property is omitted, the content of the table

> will be located in a subdirectory under the directory corresponding to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is stored in a subdirectory under the directory corresponding to the
```

schema location.

> The Iceberg connector supports creating tables using the :doc:`CREATE

Reviewer: Not sure if we need all this, but lets leave it since you already have it.

TABLE AS </sql/create-table-as>` with :doc:`SELECT </sql/select>` syntax::

    CREATE TABLE tiny_nation
    WITH (
        format = 'PARQUET'
    )
    AS
        SELECT *
        FROM nation
        WHERE nationkey < 10;

Another flavor of creating tables with :doc:`CREATE TABLE AS </sql/create-table-as>`
is with :doc:`VALUES </sql/values>` syntax::

    CREATE TABLE yearly_clicks (
        year,
        clicks
    )
    WITH (
        partitioning = ARRAY['year']
    )
    AS VALUES
        (2021, 10000),
        (2022, 20000);

``NOT NULL`` column constraint
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The Iceberg connector supports setting ``NOT NULL`` constraint on the table columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Iceberg connector supports setting ``NOT NULL`` constraints on the table columns.
```

or

```suggestion
The Iceberg connector supports setting a ``NOT NULL`` constraint on a table column.
```

The ``NOT NULL`` constraint can be set on the columns, while creating tables by
using the :doc:`CREATE TABLE </sql/create-table>` syntax::

    CREATE TABLE my_table (
        year INTEGER NOT NULL,
        name VARCHAR NOT NULL,
        age INTEGER,
        address VARCHAR
    );

When trying to insert/update data in the table, the query will

> fail if trying to set ``NULL`` value on a column having the ``NOT NULL`` constraint.

Reviewer: the query fails if trying to set NULL value

DROP TABLE
~~~~~~~~~~

The Iceberg connector supports dropping a table by using the :doc:`/sql/drop-table`
syntax. When the command succeeds, both the data of the Iceberg table and also the
information related to the table in the metastore service are removed.

> Dropping tables which have their data/metadata stored in a different location then

Reviewer: location than

a specified location.

You can create a schema with the :doc:`/sql/create-schema` statement and the
``location`` schema property. The tables in this schema, which have no explicit
``location`` set in :doc:`/sql/create-table` statement, are located in a
subdirectory under the directory corresponding to the schema location.

Create a schema on S3::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_s3_schema
  WITH (location = 's3://my-bucket/a/path/');

Create a schema on a S3 compatible object storage such as MinIO::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_s3a_schema
  WITH (location = 's3a://my-bucket/a/path/');

Create a schema on HDFS::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_hdfs_schema
  WITH (location='hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/a/path/');

Optionally, on HDFS, the location can be omitted::

  CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.my_hdfs_schema;

.. _iceberg-create-table:

Creating tables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Iceberg connector supports creating tables using the :doc:`CREATE
TABLE </sql/create-table>` syntax. Optionally specify the
:ref:`table properties <iceberg-table-properties>` supported by this connector::

    CREATE TABLE my_table (
        c1 integer,
        c2 date,

>         c3 double

Reviewer 2: nit: Type names are lowercase here, but the following DDL for NOT NULL example uses uppercase.

will be located in a subdirectory under the directory corresponding to the
schema location.

The Iceberg connector supports creating tables using the :doc:`CREATE
TABLE AS </sql/create-table-as>` with :doc:`SELECT </sql/select>` syntax::

    CREATE TABLE tiny_nation
    WITH (
        format = 'PARQUET'
    )
    AS
        SELECT *
        FROM nation
        WHERE nationkey < 10;

Another flavor of creating tables with :doc:`CREATE TABLE AS </sql/create-table-as>`
is with :doc:`VALUES </sql/values>` syntax::

    CREATE TABLE yearly_clicks (
        year,
        clicks
    )
    WITH (
        partitioning = ARRAY['year']
    )
    AS VALUES
        (2021, 10000),
        (2022, 20000);

.. _iceberg-null-column-constraint:

``NOT NULL`` column constraint
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Iceberg connector supports setting ``NOT NULL`` constraint on the table columns.

The ``NOT NULL`` constraint can be set on the columns, while creating tables by
using the :doc:`CREATE TABLE </sql/create-table>` syntax::

    CREATE TABLE my_table (
        year INTEGER NOT NULL,
        name VARCHAR NOT NULL,
        age INTEGER,
        address VARCHAR
    );

> The ``NOT NULL`` constraint can be also set when adding a new column::

Author: TODO https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/13587

The current values of a table's properties can be shown using :doc:`SHOW CREATE TABLE </sql/show-create-table>`.

COMMENT
~~~~~~~

The Iceberg connector supports setting comments on the following objects:

- tables
- views
- table columns

The ``COMMENT`` option is supported on both the table and
the table columns for the :doc:`/sql/create-table` operation.

The ``COMMENT`` option is supported for adding table columns
through the :doc:`/sql/alter-table` operations.

The connector supports the command :doc:`COMMENT </sql/comment>` for setting
comments on existing entities.

Setting comments on tables or columns is not supported in case that the

> Iceberg connector is using the :ref:`Glue catalog <iceberg-glue-catalog>`.

Reviewer 2: I believe we can comment on Glue catalog in Iceberg. 
```sql
trino:ebyhr> create table test (c1 int);
CREATE TABLE

trino:ebyhr> comment on table test is 'foo';
COMMENT

trino:ebyhr> comment on column test.c1 is 'bar';
COMMENT

trino:ebyhr> show create table test;
                                  Create Table
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 CREATE TABLE iceberg.ebyhr.test (
    c1 integer COMMENT 'bar'
 )
 COMMENT 'foo'
 WITH (
    format = 'ORC',
    format_version = 2,
    location = 's3://trino-ci-test/ebyhr/test-e0bf94ca85f2491a9ce1866dc005543c'
 )
```

Author: You are right.

I was mislead about 

https://github.com/trinodb/trino/blob/2a56ea9208fd73f0ed59cb56945b2c654306296d/plugin/trino-hive/src/main/java/io/trino/plugin/hive/metastore/glue/GlueHiveMetastore.java#L679-L682

On Iceberg however the table and column comments don't land on AWS Glue, but instead in the metadata of the table. I'll remove this false information.

The current values of a table's properties can be shown using :doc:`SHOW CREATE TABLE </sql/show-create-table>`.

COMMENT
~~~~~~~

The Iceberg connector supports setting comments on the following objects:

- tables
- views
- table columns

The connector uses the command :doc:`COMMENT </sql/comment>` for setting
comments.

Setting comments on tables or columns is not supported in case that the
Iceberg connector is using the :ref:`Glue catalog <iceberg-glue-catalog>`.

.. _iceberg-data-management:

Data management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The :ref:`sql-data-management` functionality includes support for ``INSERT``,

Reviewer: Thats all there is .. so do we want this listed here again?

Author: Mind the fact that `* :doc:`/sql/truncate`` is missing from the listing.

The current values of a table's properties can be shown using :doc:`SHOW CREATE TABLE </sql/show-create-table>`.

COMMENT
~~~~~~~

> The Iceberg connector supports setting comments on the following objects:

Reviewer: could also just do 

on tables, views, and columns with the COMMENT statement.

but .. also ALTER x ADD COMMENT and such works too right?

Author: `ALTER x ADD COMMENT` I'm not aware of this syntax. I haven't seen also any occurrence of "ADD COMMENT" in the codebase.

Reviewer: Sorry for not being clear .. I meant this stuff for example 

ALTER TABLE [ IF EXISTS ] name ADD COLUMN [ IF NOT EXISTS ] column_name data_type
  [ NOT NULL ] [ COMMENT comment ]

But also setting comments when using create 

CREATE TABLE [ IF NOT EXISTS ]
table_name (
  { column_name data_type [ NOT NULL ]
      [ COMMENT comment ]
      [ WITH ( property_name = expression [, ...] ) ]
  | LIKE existing_table_name
      [ { INCLUDING | EXCLUDING } PROPERTIES ]
  }
  [, ...]
)
[ COMMENT table_comment ]

In that case .. table and column comments..

Reviewer: We should verify and document that they all work for tables and views.. also what about materialized views?

Author: I added corresponding mentions for both `CREATE TABLE` , `ALTER TABLE`. Thanks for the suggestion.

Setting comments on MV is not supported.

- tables
- views
- columns

The connector uses the command :doc:`COMMENT </sql/comment>` for setting
comments.

Setting comments on tables or columns is not supported in case that the
Iceberg connector is using the :ref:`Glue catalog <iceberg-glue-catalog>`.

> Setting comments on view columns is not supported.

Reviewer: so maybe just say table columns above ?

also materialized views?

.. _iceberg-data-management:

Data management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :ref:`sql-data-management` functionality includes support for ``INSERT``,
``UPDATE``, ``DELETE``, and ``MERGE`` statements.

.. _iceberg-delete:

Deletion by partition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For partitioned tables, the Iceberg connector supports the deletion of entire
partitions if the ``WHERE`` clause specifies filters only on the identity-transformed
partitioning columns, that can match entire partitions. Given the table definition

> above, this SQL will delete all partitions for which ``country`` is ``US``::

Reviewer: the following SQL statement deletes

    DELETE FROM iceberg.testdb.customer_orders
    WHERE country = 'US'

> Tables using either v1 or v2 of the Iceberg specification will perform a partition

Reviewer: Drop the mention of the spec since it works for both anyway.

Also change to present tense
